Caleb Bergen
9-15-21
COMP.4630

1.) We did not have class on 2021-09-08 however I can still come up with other app ideas.
For Jason's problem, he needs a toothbrush timer. The problem is that plenty of these apps 
already exists so any app would need to do more than just time tooth brushing and also manage 
other hygiene stuff that someone might do while brushing their teeth. Maybe an app that can act
as not only a toothbrush timer but a morning medication tracker or something like that. My 
idea for this problem is to consolidate a bunch of bathroom routines into one app. For Ted's 
issue of learning to cook, while many resources exist in other forms to help one learn to cook
not many of them are in-app form. My app idea would have easy step by step directions in video 
form as well as useful recipes all with difficulty ratings. In order for this app to really work
though there would need to be a user uploaded recipes for a variety's sake. 

2.) A pretty common strategy in monetizing free apps these days into jam pack the app with 
really annoying and invasive ads. This strategy clearly works because every free app has 
seemingly adopted this strategy however it can really ruin the experience of some apps. A way of
earning money while also keeping the app experience bearable would be to have minimal ads, with the
option of purchasing an ad-free version. Another way of monetizing an app would be to lock certain
features behind a "premium" version with no ads and a full feature set. This way the app is still
adequately functional in the free version while still incentivizing users to pay.

3.) I would say that the app Tik Tok has a pretty good UI. While it's definitely not perfect the UI
is simple and effective without much bloat getting in the way of the main purpose of the app of
watching short videos. The app immediately has an endless scrolling feed of videos upon opening
it. There are a few other icons over the video which act as a means of interaction with the video
and a menu bar at the bottom, which doesn't get in the way of anything. It is very easy to get
sucked into watching video after video and I think this speaks to the effectiveness of the UI in
staying out of the way and just acting as a means to watch Tik Toks

4.) While we had no discussions in, last class, after the reflection I have done while writing this 
assignment I think I have decided I want to make an app to help me track something in my life
but I am not sure what yet. Hopefully, with more class time and reflection time, I will be able
to figure out what I want to make

